FAQ NSP
Frequently Asked Questions
Question 1: Who are eligible to apply for Scholarship Schemes?
Answer : Students fulfilling the Scheme guidelines of various Ministries are eligible to
apply for these scholarships. These are available on the Home Page of the Portal.
Question 2 : What is the last date for submitting applications online?
Answer : Closure dates for acceptance of various scholarship applications are available in
National Scholarships Portal.
Question 3 : How can I apply online for scholarship?
Answer : In order to apply online, please visit the website through URL
www.scholarships.gov.in
Question 4 : How to submit the online application? Should I need the user id and password
to apply for scholarship?
Answer : Applying procedures for Scholarship Schemes for both Fresh and Renewal are
given below:
Fresh:Student have to Click on the option “Student Login”, on the home page of National
Scholarships Portal. Fill up the application as per the instructions given by the system then click
on save button. After saving, student will get a “Temporary ID”. The system will instruct the
applicant to submit his/her Temporary ID and date of birth to fill subsequent details. Once
registration is complete on click of submit button, a Permanent Registration ID is generated
which can be used for Renewal and tracking the status of application
Renewal: Renewal Students have to apply with their Application Id and Date of Birth which they
registered previous year. Student can also use Forgot Application ID to retrieve their ID. Only
those students would be able to Renew who had actually got the scholarships payments last
year from NSP 1.0.
Question 5 : Can I edit the information already saved and up-to what time?
Answer : All the information can be edited till the closure of application form. After final
submission, your application will be forwarded to the next level and application hereby cannot
be edited.
Question 6 : Which fields in the application form are mandatory ?
Answer: Fields provided with red asterisk (*) mark are mandatory fields.
Question 7 : What happens, if I detect mistakes after forwarding the applications to the next
level?
Answer : You should separately inform the mistakes detected by you to the
Institute/District/Region/State. The software provides facility at the level of the Institute & State
to edit & correct limited information.
Question 8 : Which fields Institute/State can edit ?
Answer : The Fields which can be edited are : Gender,Religion,Category,Profession,Annual
Income,Aadhar Number,Disability,Day Scholar/Hostlar,Mode of Study,IFSC Code,Account
No.,Admission Fees and Tution Fees.However, corrections made by the Institute/State, if any,
would be conveyed instantly to the student through SMS/email.
Question 9 : Do I have to fill up the online application in one sitting ?
Answer : No. You can fill up the online application in as many sittings as you wish, until
you are satisfied that you have entered all desirable fields correctly. The software provides
facility to save your application at every stage.
Question 10 : What is UID number/Aadhaar Number?
Answer : UID number otherwise known as ‘Aadhaar’ number is Unique Identification
Number given by Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). Aadhaar is unique 12 digit
number assigned after de-duplication of biometrics.
Question 11 : Do I need to get my Aadhaar Card to apply for Scholarship ?
Answer : Aadhaar No. is not Mandatory for the Students in order to Register and fill up
the application form online. Students can apply for Scholarship without entering the Aadhaar no.
but in that case they have to enter Aadhaar Enrollment Id. For the States of Aasam, Meghalya
and Mizoram Aadhar Number is not mandatory.
Question 12 : Is there any permanent ID? How will it be communicated to me ?
Answer : Yes. An Application ID (Permanent ID) will be provided to the candidate once
his/her Registration is done. It will be conveyed to candidates through SMS and e-mail. Students
should memorize their Application ID as it will be required while applying for Fresh/renewal
scholarship.
Question 13 : Can I apply as a Fresh if I am a Renewal candidate ?
Answer : No, you cannot apply as a fresh if you are a Renewal candidate. Your application
will be rejected in that case.
Question 14 : What should I do, if I do not find my institute name in the drop-down menu ?
Answer : You should immediately approach the institute to contact with the nodal officer
of the State where the institute is located. You can also approach the Nodal Officer of that State
directly through e-mail under intimation to the Ministry. If your institute is an eligible institution,
the State Government concerned would enter it into the database and then you can apply.
Question 15 : How do I know the name and address of Nodal Officer/ State Department of my
State ?
Answer : The name and contact details of the Nodal Officer/State Department of all
States/UTs are available in “Services->Know your State Nodal Officer” option.
Question 16 : How to check the status of my application ?
Answer : Student can check the status of Online Application by submitting his/her
Permanent id and Date Of Birth and open the link “Check your Status”.
Question 17 : How to view the details of a particular scheme ?
Answer : You may click on Guidelines link of particular Scheme displaying in On-Boarded
schemes section on the Home page.
Question 18 : How to know the deadline for verification of application at
Institute/District/State Level ?
Answer : The deadline for verification of application at Institute/District/State Level will
be displayed on portal as and when the dates are being closed.
Question 19 : Would there be a procedure for publishing advertisement by States which may
be put on the portal?
Answer : This procedure would be widely published as soon as the modalities are
finalized.
Question 20 : How to overcome the problem of Login even after getting system generated
Application ID and DOB as Password ?
Answer : The “Forgot Application Id” option may be used and this problem can be
overcome by using Search by Bank Account Number and Search by Mobile Number.
Question 21 : For Renewal cases, the Login data ie Application ID and DOB of previous year is
showing an error “Invalid User Name/ Password”. What is the remedy ?
Answer : The “Forgot Application Id” option may be used and this problem can be
overcome by using Search by Bank Account Number and Search by Mobile Number.
Question 22 : There is no link available on NSP2.0 portal take care of registration of new
educational Institute.
Answer : The facility to create new Institutes is provided to the State Nodal Officers.
Question 23 : what is the prescribed format available in NSP2.0 for uploading various type of
documents ?
Answer : The format of document which can be uploaded is provided in the Document
Upload Popup Screen.
Question 24 : How to handle the issue of length of Bank Account Number being restricted to
15 characters in NSP2.0 where the bank provides 16 or 18 characters ?
Answer : The length of the Account Number has been increased sufficiently.
Question 25 : In case applicant is unable to select Block/Taluk, how to overcome this issue ?
Answer : The Block/Taluk has made Optional.
Question 26 : Telephone helpline Number 0120-6619540 given on NSP2.0 portal is not
functioning properly and lot of calls are being put on hold ?
Answer : The Telephone Helpline is been strengthened. More nodes are been added and
working hours are also being increased.
Question 27 : Would the Login credentials be sent by SMS?
Answer : Yes. The Application Id and Password sent by SMS.
Question 28 : How to know the contact details of various Nodal Officers?
Answer : The Scheme wise details of State Nodal Officers is available under the Services
Link of the NSP Portal.
Question 29 : What is the remedy in case some scholarship scheme is not coming in drop
down list ?
Answer : As per the inputs provided by the student, if these do not fit into the Guidelines,
then Scholarship cannot be provided.
Question 30 : How to track the status of my application ?
Answer : An option “Check Your Status” is available once you login with Application Id and
DOB.
Question 31 : How to know about the various services available on the portal ?
Answer : The complete User Manual, Contact Details of Scheme wise State Nodal Officers
and other services are available under the link “SERVICES” on the Home Page of the Portal .
Question 32 : Is the usage of Digital Signature Mandatory ?
Answer : The use of Digital Signature is not mandatory at registration / verification stage
of NSP Application .
Question 33 : If I know the UDISE code of my Institute but Address and Location is not known
or vice versa .how to resolve this problem ?
Answer : The school location and UDISE code and vice versa can be known from the
below link http://www.mdm-mis.nic.in/MDM/school_dise_code_scholarship.aspx
Question 34 : What kind of search facility is provided to students for Institute, District during
registration process ?
Answer : A comprehensive search facility including partial name search is available at the
Institution name Level. A drop down list of districts is also available.
Question 35 : What documents are to be uploaded on NSP 2.0 while applying for the
scholarships ?
Answer : Documents are required to be uploaded only for the Scholarship Amount more
than ?50000 per annum
Question 36 : What are the fields which are not editable at all ?
Answer : Aadhaar & Enrollment Id are not editable at any stage. these should be filled
very carefully. 